Irish-born James O'Dea,
president of the Institute of Noetic Sciences,
is one of the most poetic voices for peace alive today.
I was mesmerized as I heard him lecture
on the subject of the science of peace and transformation.
What most impressed me was that
he knows about peace from the trenches.
For ten years, he was the director
of the Washington, D.C. center for Amnesty International.
He spent those years amid the rubble of broken bodies
and lives, interceding on the behalf of those
who had no voice.
He has learned, on this incredible journey through life,
that mankind possesses and indomitable spirit
that cannot be destroyed, a spirit that we are now seeking
to evolve, individually and collectively.
(soft piano music)
You're using mythology to help us
begin to understand the process of transformation,
and I like what you're doing, and you're using the story
of Ulysses, the Sirens, and Orpheus.
And so, would you begin telling us,
why the journey of Ulysses?
And at what point in the story this mythology begins?
And then we'll start working with it.
Martin Luther King
was very convinced about a primary notion,
that we can't simply
be opposed when it comes to war and peace.
We have to be for something,
we have to enter fully into its universe.
And so he gave the example of Ulysses
and the journey of Ulysses
in relationship to the Sirens, who pull,
in their seductive way,
with their semi-beautiful song,
the men into the rocks
and they die.
And then finally, he discovers that what is needed
is something like Orpheus,
is a true music,
a music of the heart and soul that will rise above.
And so you have this contrast
in this mythic story of the adventure of Ulysses,
or the great journey, and this is just one of the prisms
that we can look through that great journey
and see that, in our time,
we have to be very discerning about the seductions
that are there, that are pulling people away
from their own heroic journey, from their great task,
and to be able to recognize
the true spiritual music, the calling of consciousness,
the arising of consciousness itself.
And I firmly believe
that we are so hard-wired
into the cosmos itself that we, in fact,
can hear the truest music
and unplug
the myriad voices of seduction.
If we hear it, we know it.
The problem is, the sound is being drown out
by all of the music of seduction.
And speak to that, if you would please,
about the various ways in which we are seduced
away from being on our paths.
I mean, for a lack of better word, seduced away
from our dharma.
Indeed.
One of the modalities that is just
part of the complexity of modern life,
is the flow of information,
that in just the course of a few weeks now,
we are absorbing more information than our counterparts
in the Middle Ages probably absorbed in a whole lifetime.
So we are information saturated,
and it becomes very difficult, when information
is at that accelerated speed coming towards us
to discern, "What is real? What is true here?
"What is really based in reality?
"Or what is just a mirage, an illusion?"
And it's a very dangerous time in that sense,
because if you're skillful you can put what we would call
a viral meme,
just a piece of meaning that is able
to connect with other meanings, into the stream
of information, and people digest it, and it affects
the physiology, because if the little virus
that you're sending out through the information realms
is a fear, "Be afraid of this,"
it's going to go right into your physiology.
It's going to affect you at a fundamental level.
You know, people flocked to The Matrix
in their millions,
and here's a movie that really was trying to deal
with this topic based on the work of a French philosopher,
Baudrillard, who said we're in a time where
it's not only a simple simulation of reality.
You pretend you're driving the car or flying the plane,
but you're not, that's a simulation.
He used another word, simulacrum,
for when the symbol has no reality behind it,
when it's pure spin.
And we live in an era where we can't tell
what is pure spin from reality.
Well, I think we can, but that's part of the seduction
that we're talking about.
So then we look at, how do we follow our dharma,
as you put it, how do we go deeply
into our own truth?
How do we find our way
back to reality?
And one of the most extraordinary
and hopeful things
that modern science is able to tell us is,
the answer lies in your body.
Not the answer, I should say, but one answer.
That your body is an instrument
of universal intelligence.
It is so connected to the reality of the cosmos
that, if you go in and listen to your body,
listen to your deepest intuitions,
you begin to activate
the antidote to the Maya, to the realm of confusion
and mirage, because right in there, your body, your gut,
your gut has a deep intelligence.
At the Institute of Noetic Sciences, we've done research
on the responsivity of the gut to remote influences.
We could go through many examples like that
and find in the heart, in the mind,
in the gut,
a tremendous receptivity to something that is alive,
we believe, in cosmic reality.
This brings to mind, as you're speaking,
how well that was portrayed.
Very funny, very alive, but how well that was portrayed
in What the Bleep?
The neuropeptides and the response in the stomach
and what happens, how you begin creating the next phase
of your own reality as the stomach
is trying to speak to you, and as you say,
the heart is speaking to you.
And there are even portions of the brain,
believe it or not, that are telling us the truth
from time to time, if we could hear them.
And can you speak to that a little bit?
Well, we know that,
when a person starts to meditate
and really gets into the meditation, that the brain begins
to synchronize.
Prior to the meditation, the energy field is scattered.
The heart coherence is scattered.
And the brain is scattered.
You could look at an MRI of the brain and see,
"Oh, this part, and this part, and this part
"are all lighting up."
As the meditation really gets underway,
the whole thing begins to look orchestral, harmonizing.
And, in fact, the parietal lobes
show signs of activity, which is where our sense of space
and confinement exists.
It's as if we begin to dissolve that strong sense
of the local presence, and we open, open, open
to the universe.
And then we know now, in the heart science
that's developed so much, that we know in meditation,
again, breathing, breathing into your heart,
it really reduces cortisol, which is that fragmenting,
hyperfocusing.
I'm going to speak to you about that
in a moment.
Biochemical.
But what we've also discovered now is,
so you're breathing into your heart,
and then you add into your heart
just the presence of one person that you love,
and that activates the body in a tremendous way.
It releases hormones, dopamine, DHEA.
So now we can have a science that is peering into
as love is remembered, is felt in the body,
how the body goes into this flow,
this sense of renewal.
So this moment is so precious, where science is turning
towards spiritual reality, and affirming,
in some very important ways, the quality and the depth
of that reality.
And we're attempting, as a species,
to find our way more toward the quietude, as you say,
toward the meditative state so that we can hear,
so that we can hear our own innate intelligence,
and the cosmic intelligence, and the guidance
that's there around us all the time that we may
or mostly don't listen to.
And yet, right now, it has to pierce this need,
on some level, because it wouldn't be displaying otherwise,
a need for extreme amounts of adrenaline.
The way we're living right now.
And it went from the martini generation
to the Starbucks generation.
So we're amped up more and more and more,
adrenaline rushes, working harder, extreme sports.
How do we begin to even quiet that down?
And that doesn't get into the other Sirens,
such as parents,
the parenting model,
that we need to succumb to a higher authority's viewpoint,
patriotism, anesthetics, drugs and alcohol.
How do we begin piercing through these
to be able to move beyond these Sirens,
to hear the voice of Orpheus, or the true voice?
So we live at a time when we have more affluence
than ever before, and yet we see increased
mental health problems, increased depression,
increased use of pharmaceuticals, increased stress.
So all of those indicators are not going away.
They're very persistent, and in some cases,
particularly with regard to youth, stress,
they are on the increase.
And there is no simple
or immediate response to this.
Certainly, I believe there is a massive overuse
of the pharmacological response of,
"Sedate it at any cost. Sedate it."
And so we go back, and we discover,
Einstein once said that the greatest theories
will be full of simplicity and beauty.
And we discover that gratitude,
that gratefulness,
is a tremendous antidote to stress
and to trauma,
because, in gratitude, when we are grateful,
when we start to be thankful, even in the face
of when we're hurt, when we say,
"I feel justifiedly upset. I've been injured," you know.
"What have you done to me?"
If, in that process, one can say to the universe,
"And thank you, thank you for sending that test my way.
"Thank you for reminding me. Thank you for
"even however bitter it is."
It's almost as if we trump the universe.
The universe says, "Okay."
And we begin to experience what positive psychology
refers to as flow.
We start to experience the flow of the universe
in gratefulness, because it can't knock us away.
We are simply in a place of acceptance and gratitude.
That is a tremendous opener to then a deeper sense of peace,
and a deeper sense of well-being,
and a deeper sense of love.
That makes total sense because,
even in your own mind, if we stop for just a moment
and think of what it feels like to be grateful for anything,
really, you feel this expansive, upward, opening
type of movement, rather than, conversely,
stopping to think of someone or something or event
in a very critical fashion, you can feel it physiologically
immediately starting to implode,
starting to close the mind down, close the heart down,
close your digestion down.
So really, we can utilize our bodies as our measurement,
per say, as to the quality of our thoughts.
Would that be a good place, also, to begin?
Yes, I believe that
the body, mind,
spirit interfusion,
we now have to look for words of the wholeness
of how they interconnect, is an emerging reality,
but it's also a state of consciousness.
We talked about the Ulysses myth.
I've sometimes also used the myth from the book of Genesis
in which Adam and Eve are expelled
from the Garden of Eden.
And here we have the image of shame,
punishment, right?
They're being sent away in shame and guilt in punishment.
We know that on that day,
Adam and Eve, their cortisol was really flowing
fast and hard because shame, and guilt, and punishment
cut off all of those other biochemicals
that give us the capacity to experience gratefulness,
and love, and forgiveness.
And then we look, you know, in the story of Genesis
it is said that, when they were expelled
from the Garden of Eden, that the angel was sent
to the East Gate, to guard the East Gate
with a flaming sword,
to protect the way back
to the Tree of Life.
And so you can almost look at a certain part
of a whole construct of history
and our biophysiology,
of that armature,
as being outside the East Gate,
the amygdala that rings, that tells us there is danger,
be alert.
We know, for example, we know, we have evidence now,
that our politicians know
about how to hijack and manipulate
our amygdala to create a fear response,
a threat response.
And we know
from our own fight-flight mechanisms
that they can not only serve us for our survival,
but we can start to use them
to control and dominate others.
So outside the Garden of Eden, if you like,
as a mythic image,
you have the body surface response.
And now science and spirituality
are going in again
to that Tree of Life and saying the innermost parts
are where love, creativity, gratefulness, forgiveness
exist in the deepest parts of our own being.
That's the place wherein quantum physics
and in so much of these new thoughts,
we begin to see the universe flowing,
where time as we know it dissolves,
where locality as we know it dissolves,
where the imaginal realm becomes very deep and rich.
You know, Einstein said that
imagination is more powerful than knowledge.
So it isn't the tricky,
fantasy,
hamster wheel fantasy
form of imagination that we're talking about.
We're talking about this deep imagination
in the meditative state, in the places where the body
is producing these deeper frequencies
and resonances,
that we begin to imagine and see the possibilities
that can unfold for us in cosmic reality.
So this is a time when we talk about the re-enchanment
of the cosmos.
Ervin Laszlo wrote a wonderful book called
"The Reenchantment of the Cosmos,"
because we have been disenchanted.
We've been separated, somehow,
in a locked materialistic universe,
with God apparently somewhere else in the universe.
Ready to punish us.
Ready to punish us, exactly.
Indeed.
So we begin looking at the song
from Orpheus, and we start looking at the symbols
of that, or the vibrations that that would represent,
truth and beauty, inclusivity,
completeness, wholeness, and love.
Now, are those songs?
Those sound to me to be the song that can certainly trump
the adrenaline rush and the harshness and seperation
and hatred of the other once they can be heard.
But another point that you brought up,
and, in fact, I almost raised my hand in the audience today
to bring up, is how the light and the dark,
and how these polarities live side by side.
And if I may say what I was going to say then,
to me, I've always been intrigued with the immense amount
of these higher forces that come through people
when they're in the darkest times, like in the trenches
in the middle of war.
The bonding, the love, the courage, the compassion
for each other, that starts surfacing
between comrades in war.
That really seems to end up being the highlight
of their lives because it's the only time these men
were able to access it on such a visceral level.
What is the stance between light and dark?
Yes, so, in our mythic example
of Ulysses, the Sirens, and Orpheus,
Orpheus becomes the singer of a reality
that is able to save the lives
and to move the ship
beyond the call of the Sirens.
And Orpheus is wholeness.
Orpheus has been to the Underworld,
he has visited the Underworld,
and he rises out of the Underworld
with a new song.
So there is a mysterious connection
between our suffering and our liberation,
between the forces in the universe
that want to shake us out of our tree,
that, in a sense, have to let us know
when we're stuck in a conditioned view,
when we're stuck in a wound, when we're stuck in a place
where there is no vitality or movement, because the universe
and evolution itself is ever dynamic, it's ever in movement.
And so it may take a great wind
to move us, and sometimes that can be suffering.
It can be negative, it can come from trauma.
But it can open us, it can remind us again
that we are on a journey, that there is movement,
that there's dynamism in the universe.
You know, the poet David Whyte
has these wonderful lines.
"Sometimes it takes a great sky,
"Sometimes it takes a great sky
"to find the small and indescribable wedge
"of freedom in your own heart."
And sometimes, the universe does that.
It says, "I am going to be the great sky,
"because your little wedge has gotten too tight."
Let's take the example of 9/11.
You've worked on the subject of transformation and peace
for many, many years of your life.
Your involvement with Amnesty International,
not just letting go of, but encouraging governments
of the world to stop cruel and unusual practices
and punishments of people, both theirs and others.
And let's look at 9/11.
There is an interesting opportunity
in this paradigm changing time, in that it gave
a great opportunity for compassion.
But the dark side of that, also a great opportunity
for manipulation and control.
Can you speak a little bit to this?
Yes, 9/11 is a very significant event at many levels.
9/11, as it unfolded,
we saw the world with New York
and the United States, there were people all over the world
who were saying, "We're New Yorkers too,
"This has happened to us."
In fact, in a mysterious way,
it was a unique event
because more representatives from different countries
on the world died at one moment than at any other point
that we know of in human history.
So, in effect, it was a global event in that sense,
and people convened around it.
And what happened, if you like, scientifically and medically
to us all, also, at that moment, was that we all
had an amygdala response.
Now the amygdala there in the mid-brain
is designed to raise the alarm, and to tell you
that there is danger or threat, or to be anxious
about something, but it's also right next to the part
of our brain that imprints long term memory.
And so many of us can remember precisely where we were,
what we were doing, when we heard about 9/11.
Now, as 9/11 unfolded,
the human rights community in the world said,
"This was a horrendous criminal act.
"Go hunt the criminals. Use international law.
"Use every aspect of international law
"to get at the criminals who are responsible
"for this great and horrible act."
Great in the sense of scale, I mean, a horrible act.
But the course that was taken was not the pursuit
of the criminals.
It was the pursuit of a whole conjunction
of other political motivations that, as we know,
have changed from day one.
And 9/11 has increasingly been used
as a manipulation, as a reference point
repeatedly used in contexts to remind people
to activate the amygdala response,
to activate a fear response when
there are other political motivations involved.
And we have some distortion effect there.
And as those elements have unfolded,
that embrace of the United States,
that incredible moment on the planet
when so many people came together,
now has dissolved to a sense of suspicion and distrust of,
"What are those motivations?
"Why is 9/11 now being used in these other ways?"
And so we have something that,
those of use who are working on expanding our consciousness
and waking up have to be able to look at these realities,
not enter them so much
that they consume us,
that we live in the conspiracy, or we live
in trying to understand the motivations of others,
but we have to recognize them, recognize in the field,
this is a distorted pattern, and how do we,
in our great journey, move around the attraction,
the pull of those patterns, towards, again,
that global embrace, that moment when human beings
around the world will come together in solidarity
around suffering?
That is something that we need to pursue,
and dialogue, I believe, is the modality to take us there.
How do we engage in dialogue with each other?
And this is something that
you key in on a lot, dialogue,
and a method of communication.
And one of the people you have referred to
whose work is so important is Marshall Rosenberg
with nonviolent communication,
and some of the questions that are asked.
Can you speak to that for a moment as well?
So we can start getting an idea, as individuals
in our own homes, in our own families, our own groups,
communities, and so forth, of the kinds of questions
we need to ask to begin turning
this bittersweet event and period of time
in our lives into an opportunity
for genuine alchemical growth.
Here's an important piece of advice,
a practical piece of advice, if you're ever in a situation
where you're being threatened,
where the violence has come to your door.
There is one question
that seems to be able to help diffuse violent intent
or aggression more than any other,
and that's a question that, in a sense,
is respectful to the other.
It's sort of an amazing flip in some ways.
You say to the one who's coming at you,
"What do you need me to understand?
"What do you need me to understand in this moment?"
And that question has a way of triggering
a rational response, something that says,
"Well, I need you to understand this. I am angry."
I see, I see. And why are you so angry?
Can you help me understand your anger?
And so, Marshall Rosenberg has looked
at nonviolent communication, and how to begin
to dialogue even in deep distress,
even in moments of danger.
And I believe
that the whole planet
could shift.
That's a big statement, it's a bold statement,
to say that the whole planet could shift
if we began modalities of dialogue that said to the other,
to the one who is framed as the enemy,
"What are you really trying to get me to understand here?"
I can feel the truth in that.
You have lived with this personally in your work.
You've had to do work where this question
has had to be asked in some dicey situations.
Can you share some of that with us?
I lived in Beirut in 1982 and '83
when Beirut was bombed,
and the war occurred.
And then the PLO were sent out,
and then the Israelis invaded West Beirut.
There were a whole sequence of complex historical occasions
that I won't go into here, but at one point,
there was also a massacre
in the Palestinian camps,
the Sabra, Shatila camps, and I sometimes say,
if I were graphing my life, that the low point,
the point where the darkness was so palpable,
was in Beirut during that period of the massacres,
because, you know, I could experience the war,
and the bombing, and the fear,
but to actually be close to a situation
where whole families were massacred around the table,
where they found children murdered under the beds,
in hallways, in toilet rooms, on the threshold,
on the doorsteps of their houses,
the vivid nature of the diseased hatred
that caused that massacre left me at a dark spot,
at a point where I wondered,
"Is humanity really recoverable?"
And shortly after that, I went to a camp
that had been completely destroyed in the bombing,
south of Beirut.
And there was an old man in the rubble,
and I was with some medical teams from England and Sweden,
and we were walking through the camp,
and this old man waved to us, shouting,
"Come and have coffee."
And we said no, and then he repeated it.
And we came over, there was slab of concrete
that used to be the roof of his house, and he pulled out
a Calor gas stove and started to make, in the Arabic style,
the coffee.
And he didn't talk about
who had killed his relatives.
What he wanted us to see was the indestructible nature
of the human being.
He wanted desperately for us to see his dignity.
And we witnessed that dignity.
That was the moment of my recovery,
because I saw that the spirit,
the spirit of the human is indestructible in that sense.
No bomb, no massacre can even take that away.
That we have a destiny beyond these catastrophic
and disastrous events in our lives.
And so I'm truly a human being who has looked
into the dungeons of the world for ten years in Amnesty,
every day, waking up to stories
of torture and killings.
And yet,
I am one who is deeply hopeful
that there is a new configuration,
there is a new mindset arising,
that out of this evolutionary trauma,
we are rising with a new sense of the dynamic relationship
between our inner life, our hopes, our beliefs,
our attitudes, and how it affects our health,
our communities, our families,
and that we truly have the possibility, in this race
for the planet with all the ecological challenges
that face us, we have an opportunity to reconfigure
the whole human enterprise in ways that will truly,
I believe, astonish us.
I'm so happy to hear
this hope coming from you in particular,
because of what you've witnessed in your lifetime.
When you talk about the transformation,
the definition you give of this,
because hopefully, this exact indomitable spirit,
the true spirit, is going to be what's going to take us
into this genuine transformation.
And the way you describe it is the liberation
of consciousness from constriction
of identity or belief.
That's very succinct.
So what is going to free our consciousness
from this kind of constriction
that we find ourselves amidst?
From all the forces that are bombarding us?
We have discovered that we are in an irreversible story.
Evolution is an irreversible arrow.
And in our story, we now see earth, our home,
our collective home, in the balance,
that she is threatened.
Her oceans, the skies, the level of pollution,
the loss of species.
So now we are looking not just at the survival
and the fate of our family, of our tribe, of our group,
of our nation, but we're looking at a greater whole.
And so transformation is always this movement
within the self, within the community,
within the whole of the earth itself,
towards something greater, more whole, more inclusive.
And it is because we belong in this cosmos,
because we are a part of cosmic reality,
that we can, in fact, remember,
"Yes, I am greater than that,
"that which I thought I was,
"that which I define myself as,
"often in a wounded way."
Even in whole societies that say,
"Our true meaning is about the wounds we carry
"from the past."
That we can liberate ourselves and discover
something that unifies, that connects, that interconnects.
Science is looking at the interconnections at the vast level
of the quantum reality.
Medicine is looking at the wholeness of the body,
the spirit, mind, body connect.
Even down to genetics, the field of epigenetics,
which is the field that is looking
at what switches on and off the genes,
the positive genes and the negative genes,
beginning to look at our core attitudes and beliefs
as very instrumental
in switching on and off our genes.
So there we have,
the story of transformation
is that story that brings us to a greater and greater
sense of wholeness.
And some would say, "When we've matured as a species.
"We're at the edge of the galaxy, maybe, for a reason,
"maybe until we grow up." (laughs)
(laughs)
That has been said,
That maybe,
the reality, that sense
that it isn't
a dry series of empty worlds out there,
that there is a whole reality waiting for us.
There's a sense of, we're always called by that notion
of something more whole, more vastly interconnected
than we at first conceived.
Well, my entire being can feel the truth
and the beauty in your words.
And at this point, is there any final thought
that would like to impart right now,
beyond what you've said?
A few months ago, I went to the Sierra Madres,
to Santa Marta, the highest coastal mountain in the world,
and on this mountain, there's a very mysterious people.
They're known to the West as the Kogi,
but there are actually four peoples on the mountain.
The Kogi, the Arhuaca, the Wiwa, and the Kankuamo.
Now, in their belief, or their myth,
or however you want to relate to that,
they actually believe they are a remnant from Atlantis.
And they have an extraordinary,
probably one of the most extraordinary oral traditions
on the planet, because their spiritual elders
spend the first nine years of their lives inside a cave
getting cosmological instruction about the whole story,
the big story, and they trace that through Atlantis
to the current time.
And they, in the last twenty years, have been saying
to the rest of the world that they refer to
as "Little Brother," not in any derogatory sense,
but as simply younger in time,
that they are elder, meaning they have a record
in time that goes back further.
They've been saying that the earth is in danger,
that there are imbalances,
that there is potentially very vast ecological devastation.
And yet, they look at all of this,
some people refer to them as the Buddhist monks
of the indigenous people, they look at all of this
in terms of the patterns, the waveforms, the patterns.
They are highly developed in terms of their telepathic
and pattern-reading skills.
And so they look, and they say,
"Ah, look. Here's where the pattern is out of balance."
Not, "Here's where you are wrong.
"Here's what you did wrong. Here's where the blame is."
But, "Here's where the pattern is uneven,"
and the whole patterns that they see
emerging on the planet at this time.
Because I believe that awareness that they hold
is an ancient, it's a once and future awareness,
it's the capacity in awareness to see
what is out of balance, and the very depth
of that objective seeing
helps restore the balance.
The judgement, the blaming, the shaming,
the finding the enemy, the wrong guy, the person
who's not in the club, the person who should be expelled,
that is going to continue to create further distortions,
but the awareness, the nonjudgemental awareness itself,
is the ultimate act of non-denial,
it's the act of seeing, of knowing.
And in that deep knowing, the balance can be restored.
And that's, I think, work for all of us.
Individually and collectively.
Thank you so much for your time.
Thank you.
(soft piano music)
If you enjoyed the wise words of James O'Dea,
you might also enjoy our interviews
with Peter Russell and James Barrett.
Meanwhile, click on the link below
to read his President's Message to Noetic Science Members
on the subject of consciousness and healing.
It's wonderful.
Until next time, thanks for watching.